Haskell Style Guide
===================

(Adapted from [Johan Tibell's style guide][1] and [the Snap
framework's style guide][2].)

This is a short document describing the preferred coding style for
this project. When something isn't covered by this guide you should
stay consistent with the code in the other modules.

[1]: http://github.com/tibbe/haskell-style-guide/blob/master/haskell-style.md
[2]: http://snapframework.com/docs/style-guide

General Style
-------------

(section adopted from the [GHC Coding Style Guidelines][3].)

It's much better to write code that is transparent than to write code
that is short.

Often it's better to write out the code longhand than to reuse
a generic abstraction (not always, of course). Sometimes it's better
to duplicate some similar code than to try to construct an elaborate
generalisation with only two instances. Remember: other people have to
be able to quickly understand what you've done, and overuse of
abstractions just serves to obscure the really tricky stuff, and
there's no shortage of that in this project.

If you must make stylistic changes, commit them separately from
functional changes, so that someone looking back through the change
logs can easily distinguish them.

[3]: http://hackage.haskell.org/trac/ghc/wiki/Commentary/CodingStyle

Formatting
----------

### Line Length

Maximum line length is *80 characters*. Comments should be wrapped
accordingly. There should be no trailing whitespace anywhere in your
code. This makes git diff output look ugly and causes spurious merge
conflicts.

In Emacs, you can add the following code to your `init.el` file to
enforce this:

    (add-hook 'haskell-mode-hook (lambda () (set-fill-column 80)))
    (add-hook 'haskell-mode-hook
              (lambda ()
                 (add-hook 'before-save-hook 'delete-trailing-whitespace t t)))

### Indentation

Tabs are illegal. Use spaces for indenting. Indent your code blocks
with *4 spaces*. Indent the `where` keyword two spaces to set it apart
from the rest of the code and indent the definitions in a `where`
clause 2 spaces. Guards are usually indented 2 spaces. Some examples:

    sayHello :: IO ()
    sayHello = do
        name <- getLine
        putStrLn $ greeting name
      where
        greeting name = "Hello, " ++ name ++ "!"
    
    filter :: (a -> Bool) -> [a] -> [a]
    filter _ []     = []
    filter p (x:xs)
      | p x       = x : filter p xs
      | otherwise = filter p xs

### Blank Lines

One blank line between top-level definitions. No blank lines between
type signatures and function definitions. Two blank lines between the
last import and the first top-level definition. Add one blank line
between functions in a type class instance declaration if the
functions bodies are large. Use your judgement.

### Whitespace

Surround binary operators with a single space on either side. Use your
better judgement for the insertion of spaces around arithmetic
operators but always be consistent about whitespace on either side of
a binary operator. Don't insert a space after a lambda.

### Data Declarations

Align the constructors in a data type definition. Example:

    data Tree a = Branch !a !(Tree a) !(Tree a)
                | Leaf
    
For long type names the following formatting is also acceptable:

    data HttpException
        = InvalidStatusCode Int
        | MissingContentHeader

Format records as follows:

    data Person = Person
        { firstName :: !String  -- ^ First name
        , lastName  :: !String  -- ^ Last name
        , age       :: !Int     -- ^ Age
        } deriving (Eq, Show)

### List Declarations

Align the elements in the list. Example:

    exceptions =
        [ InvalidStatusCode
        , MissingContentHeader
        , InternalServerError
        ]

Optionally, you can skip the first newline. Use your judgement.

    directions = [ North
                 , East
                 , South
                 , West
                 ]

### Pragmas

Put pragmas immediately following the function they apply to.
Example:

    id :: a -> a
    id x = x
    {-# INLINE id #-}

In the case of data type definitions you must put the pragma before
the type it applies to. Example:

    data Array e = Array
        {-# UNPACK #-} !Int
        !ByteArray

### Hanging Lambdas

You may or may not indent the code following a "hanging" lambda. Use
your judgement. Some examples:

    bar :: IO ()
    bar = forM_ [1, 2, 3] $ \n -> do
              putStrLn "Here comes a number!"
              print n

    foo :: IO ()
    foo = alloca 10 $ \a ->
          alloca 20 $ \b ->
          cFunction a b

### Export Lists

Format export lists as follows:

    module Data.Set
        (
          -- * The @Set@ type
          Set
        , empty
        , singleton
    
          -- * Querying
        , member
        ) where

### If-then-else expressions

Generally, guards should be preferred over if-then-else expressions,
where possible. if-then-else is preferred to case analysis on
a boolean. Short cases should usually be put on a single line (when
line length allows it).

When writing non-monadic code (i.e. when not using `do`) and guards
can't be used, you can align if-then-else expressions like you would
normal expressions:

    foo = if ...
          then ...
          else ...

In monadic code, so long as you use the Haskell 2010 dialect and
above, you can use the same alignment as above. A different alignment
rule for monadic code is no longer necessary. Otherwise, you should be
consistent with the 4-spaces indent rule, and the `then` and the
`else` keyword should be aligned. Examples:

    foo = do
        instruction <- decodeInstruction
        skip <- load Memory.skip
        if skip == 0x0000
            then do
                execute instruction
                addCycles $ instructionCycles instruction
            else do
                store Memory.skip 0x0000
                addCycles 1

### Case expressions

The alternatives in a case expression can be indented using either of
the two following styles:

    foobar = case something of
        Just j  -> foo
        Nothing -> bar

or as

    foobar = case something of
               Just j  -> foo
               Nothing -> bar

Align the `->` arrows when it helps readability.

Imports
-------

Imports should be grouped in the following order:

1. local application/library specific imports
2. related third party imports
3. standard library imports

Put a blank line between each group of imports. The imports in each
group should be sorted alphabetically, by module name.

Always use explicit import lists or `qualified` imports for standard
and third party libraries. This makes the code more robust against
changes in these libraries. Exception: the Prelude.

Use your judgement when it comes to local application/library specific
imports. On the one hand, they make for more maintainable code because
identifiers that are removed from the imported module will be caught
early and identifiers added to the imported module do not risk
clashing with local identifiers. They also serve as documentation as
to which parts of a module are actually required.

However, explicit import lists are also much more verbose, and slow
down development. Moreover, in a collaborative environment, explicit
import lists can cause spurious conflicts, since two otherwise
unrelated changes to a file may both require changes to the same
import list.

The qualifier for well known modules, such as `ByteString` can be
shortened further, eg `BS`. But in general, prefer descriptive
qualifiers rather than one letter ones. For example

    import qualified Data.Map as Map                  -- good
    import qualified Data.Map as M                    -- not so good

Comments
--------

### Punctuation

Write proper sentences; start with a capital letter and use proper
punctuation.

### Top-Level Definitions

Comment every top level function (particularly exported functions),
and provide a type signature; use Haddock syntax in the comments.
Comment every exported data type. Function example:

    -- | Send a message on a socket. The socket must be in a connected
    -- state. Returns the number of bytes sent. Applications are
    -- responsible for ensuring that all data has been sent.
    send :: Socket      -- ^ Connected socket
         -> ByteString  -- ^ Data to send
         -> IO Int      -- ^ Bytes sent

For functions the documentation should give enough information to
apply the function without looking at the function's definition.

Record example:

    -- | Bla bla bla.
    data Person = Person
        { age  :: !Int     -- ^ Age
        , name :: !String  -- ^ First name
        }

For fields that require longer comments format them like so:

    data Record = Record
        { -- | This is a very very very long comment that is split over
          -- multiple lines.
          field1 :: !Text
          
          -- | This is a second very very very long comment that is split
          -- over multiple lines.
        , field2 :: !Int
        }

### End-of-Line Comments

Separate end-of-line comments from the code using *at least* 2 spaces.
Your editor might let you set a preferred column for end-of-line
comments. Align comments for data type definitions. Some examples:

    data Parser = Parser
        !Int					  -- Current position
        !ByteString				  -- Remaining input
    
    foo :: Int -> Int
    foo n = salt * 32 + 9
      where
        salt = 453645243			  -- Magic hash salt.

### Links

Use in-line links economically. You are encouraged to add links for
API names. It is not necessary to add links for all API names in
a Haddock comment. We therefore recommend adding a link to an API name
if:

* The user might actually want to click on it for more information (in
  your judgment), and

* Only for the first occurrence of each API name in the comment (don't
  bother repeating a link)

Naming
------

Use mixed-case when naming functions and camel-case when naming data
types.

For readability reasons, don't capitalize all letters when using an
abbreviation. For example, write `HttpServer` instead of `HTTPServer`.
Exception: Two letter abbreviations, e.g. `IO`.

### Records

Where appropriate, add an unabbreviated prefix to the name of record
fields. Example:

    -- | Messages consist of their typeRep fingerprint and their encoding
    data Message = Message 
      { messageFingerprint :: !Fingerprint 
      , messageEncoding    :: !BSL.ByteString
      }

This is not necessary for modules that export only one data type *and*
are meant to be imported qualified.

### Modules

Use singular when naming modules e.g. use `Data.Map` and
`Data.ByteString.Internal` instead of `Data.Maps` and
`Data.ByteString.Internals`.

Functions
---------

Use of catamorphisms (e.g. `foldr`, `foldl`) and other special case
higher-order functions (such as `map`) is preferable to writing
structurally recursive functions with explicit recursion. This is
because a fold makes it a type error to forget the base case -
a problem with the code that could otherwise go undetected. It also
documents the fact that the function is supposed to be structurally
recursive, as opposed to functions that use general recursion.

Dealing with laziness
---------------------

By default, use strict data types and lazy functions.

### Data types

Constructor fields should be strict, unless there's an explicit reason
to make them lazy. This avoids many common pitfalls caused by too much
laziness and reduces the number of brain cycles the programmer has to
spend thinking about evaluation order.

    -- Good
    data Point = Point
        { pointX :: !Double  -- ^ X coordinate
        , pointY :: !Double  -- ^ Y coordinate
        }

    -- Bad
    data Point = Point
        { pointX :: Double  -- ^ X coordinate
        , pointY :: Double  -- ^ Y coordinate
        }

Additionally, unpacking simple fields often improves performance and
reduces memory usage:

    data Point = Point
        { pointX :: {-# UNPACK #-} !Double  -- ^ X coordinate
        , pointY :: {-# UNPACK #-} !Double  -- ^ Y coordinate
        }

As an alternative to the `UNPACK` pragma, you can put

    {-# OPTIONS_GHC -funbox-strict-fields #-}

at the top of the file. Including this flag in the file inself instead
of e.g. in the Cabal file is preferable as the optimization will be
applied even if someone compiles the file using other means (i.e. the
optimization is attached to the source code it belongs to).

Note that `-funbox-strict-fields` applies to all strict fields, not
just small fields (e.g. `Double` or `Int`). If you're using GHC 7.4 or
later you can use `NOUNPACK` to selectively opt-out for the unpacking
enabled by `-funbox-strict-fields`.

### Functions

Have function arguments be lazy unless you explicitly need them to be
strict.

The most common case when you need strict function arguments is in
recursion with an accumulator:

    mysum :: [Int] -> Int
    mysum = go 0
      where
        go !acc []    = acc
        go acc (x:xs) = go (acc + x) xs

Misc
----

### Warnings

Code should be compilable with `-Wall -Werror`, i.e. there should be
no warnings.

### Debug facilities

Use of `Debug.Trace` and other debugging modules should not be
committed to any stable branches.
